---
layout: post
title: "Why C++ is My Language of Choice"
tags:
    - cpp
    - meta
---
I had a discussion with a friend of mine that came from a, what I would call,
Microsoft indoctrination camp. He tried to persuade me of the benefits of .Net.
As a matter of fact, I am programming C# for a living since a good while, but I 
just can't see the advantage. The conversation was unfortunately cut short and I 
was unable to really bring my points across. So I decided to take the time and 
write them down in as much detail as possible.

<!--more-->

First off, I want to say I am not anti-Microsoft per se. I try addressing 
technical problems with a pure technical analysis. Just to be clear, stating 
that the decision for any technology is a business decision, is pure and utter 
nonsense. True if you happen to have an existing body of work, you don't want to 
change the technology just because a more adequate one came along. That is just 
wasting money. But when you start with a clean slate, it is purely a technical 
decision.

As a side note, I will focus on C#. This is because .Net is basically used only 
with C#. There are a few Visual Basic programmers that never learned a better 
language and a few C++/CLI people who desperately try to make their old program 
a better thing by using .Net. But anybody who starts out will use C#. 

To understand the discussion further, I first have to clarify what C++ and .Net is.

<h2>What is C++</h2>

C++ is a language standardized by the ISO. You can pick up many compilers from 
different vendors and compile an executable program. C++ also specifies a small 
standard library for common tasks, such as strings, reading files and some math 
support. But it is so small that other common tasks such as threading or 
networking are not implemented. C++ by itself is not very usable, but can be 
extended through a myriad of third party libraries.

<h2>What is .Net</h2>

.Net is a framework that provides a number of languages, such as C#, 
VisualBasic.Net or C++/CLI. .Net is specified by the ECMA, but the standard is 
lead by Microsoft and almost only Microsoft. This is natural since they developed 
the technology. The framework provided by .Net is huge. You have basically everything 
from XML, over web services and COM, passing by database access and finally ending 
at fancy user interface components. The .Net runtime also provides a number of 
heigh level services for the languages, notably reflection, garbage collection 
and access validation.

<h2>Lots of Features</h2>

When people try to sell .Net they often will point to the many features that 
the framework and runtime provide. Almost every time they would say something 
like "and with C++ you would have to develop it all yourself" or "the runtime 
protects you from invalidating your memory". There is a certain little truth in 
these statements but even significantly more ignorance. This comes from two 
misconceptions. The first is their utter lack of knowledge about other 
technologies. The second is the fallacy that technology can accommodate for 
bad programming.

<h2>One Framework</h2>

    Three Classes for the Software Engineers under the sky,
    Seven for the Programmers in their halls of stone,
    Nine for Code Monkeys doomed to die,
    One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
    In the Land of Microsoft where the Shadows lie.
    One Framework to rule them all, One Framework to find them,
    One Framework to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
    In the Land of Microsoft where the Shadows lie.

Ignoring the implications of vendor lock in, having one huge framework 
supplied with your language is not the blessing you might have thought. 
At first glance it seems like this is a huge boost in productivity, 
since you do not need to implement that much. To a certain degree this 
is the case. The framework is built to accommodate all common use cases 
and some more special ones. The really big problem arises when your 
problem domain just will not map into the solution domain of the 
framework. Now you will notice that you are programming around 
idiosyncrasies of the framework, since it will just not bend that way. 
Throwing out the framework and looking for a different one or 
implementing the functionality from scratch is hard to justify, since 
your managers bought into the cost saving idea of having an extensive 
framework. 

With C++ that just will not happen, since there is no framework to start 
with. You can go out there and look for a framework or library that 
helps you in your task. There are literally like sand on the beach. Try 
them out, see which matches your use case best. You even have the option 
to implement it yourself. This is a really valuable options, since there 
are quite a few cases where implementing just what you need is less 
effort and code than translating your problem to a framework. Even the 
standard library is optional. As it happens, it is just a library like 
any other and you can decide not to use it. 

The only drawback that C++ has is that there is no central repository of 
libraries. Technologies such as Python or Pearl certainly nailed this 
aspect. On the other hand there is Google... 

<h2>Do it with Style</h2> 

Many languages and technologies bind you to a specific programming 
paradigm. The only exception I know is Pearl and C++. A critique of C++ 
is often that it is not a "real" or "pure" object oriented 
language and I think this is great. With C++ you can program procedural, 
functional, object oriented, aspect oriented or service oriented. The 
language just does not bog you down by applying stupid restrictions. 
True some more esoteric features are provided by third party frameworks 
such AspectC++ or sigc++'s lambda expressions. (Yes, there is also' 
boost's lambda expressions, I know.) 

The important aspect to remember is that certain problems just lend 
themselves to certain programming paradigms. In the end of the day you 
need to solve problems, not implement pure or fancy solutions. Limiting 
your solution space will hinder you, not empower you. 

<h2>Alzheimer</h2> 

I think one of the features touted by many "modern" languages is 
garbage collection. But I think that in many cases this is more of an 
anti-feature. 

First off, I want to point out that if you really want you can also have 
garbage collection for C++. There are multiple implementations, but the 
most famous is Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative garbage collector. It 
actually is collector for pure C. But because of C++ is compatible to C 
the collector is trivially adapted to C++ and in the case of that 
collector it is done for you. 

As a result you have many options when programming C++. You can put the 
memory on the stack, explicitly allocate it on the heap, wrap it into a 
reference counting pointer scheme, extend that scheme to add copy on 
write semantic, full blown garbage collection and you can even write 
your own memory management. With a language like C# you just have 
garbage collection and that is it. 

If you listen to .Net marketing you will hear that object construction 
and destruction is so much faster than C++. Here is the scoop: that is 
utter nonsense. This is only true if you artificially narrow your sight. 
Create a bunch of objects of one type and destroy them. Here C# will 
outperform C++ by an order of a magnitude. But that is comparing a 
kitchen knife with a katana when chopping vegetables. But you still want 
the katana when you are standing on the battlefield. 

To understand why this is the way it is and why it fails in real 
applications you need to understand a bit how garbage collection works. 
The basics of garbage collection are that you allocate an object and 
just let it leak when you are done using it. It is then the task of the 
garbage collector to figure out which objects are used and which not. 
There are different heuristics to do this, but that is not so important. 
The important part is that memory that is unused is not immediately (in 
some implementations never) released to the operating system. Now when a 
new object is created the garbage collector looks in it's unused 
memory if there happens to be a chunk of unused memory that fits the 
size. In this case no new memory is allocated. This is done as a 
performance measure, since allocation and release of memory is quite 
expensive, since the operating system needs to track it all. 

When looking at our example you can clearly see why the implementation 
using the garbage collector is faster, only a few objects are allocated 
and then reused. But this example is an unfair competition, since C++ 
has other ways to deal with creating and destroying many objects of the 
same type. First creating the object on the stack is simple, easy and 
here not one byte of memory is allocated or freed. Even if the problem 
is more difficult and you need to implement allocation, you can simply 
implement the flyweight pattern. Here the memory management is 
explicitly handled and you pool all small objects into one large memory 
pool that is allocated once. 

If you make the example even more complex with objects of different 
sizes, you will start to see the garbage collector stating to struggle 
along. There are two problems. First the collector can not reuse as many 
memory chunks since the objects are different sizes. Second you are 
still paying for the luxury of garbage collection, the collector must 
figure out which object are not used anymore and manage it's internal 
data structure to keep track of everything. When you have high memory 
fluctuation, you will end up also paying for the memory release penalty, 
since the collector will need to free some memory. The only difference 
is that this ocures at an unspecified time later in the program. 

But the biggest problem about managed memory is not the technical 
aspects, but poor programmers. The advantage about garbage collection is 
that you don't need to worry about memory; the disadvantage about 
garbage collection is that you don't need to worry about memory. With 
unmanaged programs finding memory leaks is relatively simple, run the 
program through a leak analyser and it will point out where you lost 
your memory. Manages programs are impossible to analyse with such simple 
means. Leave dangling references and your memory will balloon out of 
control. I have seen really weird ways in which the garbage collector 
was broken, that started as simple programs. The irony is that many 
applications are required to use a form of explicit memory management to 
work around these problems, such as the disposable "pattern" used in 
C#. 

<h2>Got Properties?</h2> 

The syntactic sugar that C# added in the form of properties is quite 
evil. Although used in moderation properties have the potential to 
lighten code a bit. The problem is that more often than you would wish, 
they are more trouble that good. When using a method to get or set a 
value you know you are using a method. Because it is a method you can 
call is anyway you like. It is clear that "obj.get_value()", 
"obj.retrive_value()" or "obj.compute_value()" have different 
expected runtime and "obj.value" implies near to no runtime. But in 
practice you just don't know. Although there is a certain consensus 
only to use properties for trivial operations, you can never rally be 
sure about it. 

<h2>Mirror Mirror on the Wall</h2> 

In my opinion the biggest anti-feature is reflection in a strongly typed 
language. One of the strengths of strongly typed languages is that the 
interface and layout of objects is well known at compile-time. This has 
the main benefit that code has as little ambiguity as possible. But this 
is completely circumvented when you just pass in an "object" and use 
reflection to interact with it. 

The main goal of reflection is to decouple the concrete type and 
algorithms that work on them. But more often you need ways to flag 
certain properties, methods or classes to have different behaviour than 
others. In C# this is solved with attributes. But now you actually added 
coupling to achieve this. The class now needs to know in what context it 
will be used and add the appropriate attributes. 

It gets even more difficult to trace when reflection is not enough and 
you need to influence the reflection directly. In the case of C# this 
would be the use of ICustomTypeDescriptor. I mean honestly, "I put 
generic implementation into your generic implementation so you can 
reflect while you reflect"? At this point you should just throw 
reflection out of the window and properly think about what you want to 
accomplish and properly design you code. 

<h2>Not so fast buster!</h2> 

But at least C# is as fast as C++, right? Wrong! True, you got to hand 
to the people of Microsoft, they did allot of work trying to make the 
.Net runtime as fast as humanly possible. (At least we are lead to 
believe that.) But here is the scoop, no matter what they do, they will 
never achieve the same speed. Why? Because of all the extra safety built 
in. Each time you access a reference it is checked for validity. Each 
time you call along assembly boarders your call is marshalled. Each time 
you allocate something the garbage collector needs to update its state. 
Each time you do something with the operating system it is checked 
against security settings. Each time you add a variable it is 
initialized to something neutral. All in all it is this comfort you are 
paying for. 

<h2>So it is easy to use?</h2> 

This is something that Microsoft is trying to sell you, C# and .Net is 
really easy to use and learn. This is basically pitched with the 
arguments that all the safety means are in place. This is like giving 
novice drivers a tank, sure they don't get hurt but the damage is till 
there. It basically makes no real difference if you get an access 
violation or a NullReference exception. In the end of the day they need 
to learn to program properly, if they want to build any application that 
is more complex than "calc.exe". In my experience novice programmers 
will probably dig themselves a hole they can't get out of. 

<h2>Dependencies Dependencies Dependencies</h2> 

When you bundle a C++ application you need all dependencies. In my 
experience this is around a dozen DLLs accounting to something like a 
few MB of disk space. They are all copied to the folder with your 
program, thus avoiding DLL-hell. 

With .Net applications this is more complicated. First you need to 
ensure that the .Net framework is installed. Assuming that the framework 
is already installed is just rude and there are enough times where this 
really this is not the case. Let's face it, the .Net framework is huge 
and you need to bundle the .Net framework in your installer. The tragic 
part is that you are probably only are using 10% of the actual 
framework, but you simply do not have a choice. It is almost technically 
impossible to install only parts of the framework. 

Additionally it is even more complicated to install .Net assemblies. 
Simple DLLs are just copied next to your program or put somewhere in the 
PATH. But .Net assemblies need to be correctly registered. Although not 
such a big deal, it is just one more unnecessary hurdle. 

<h2>The Right Tool</h2> 

I like C++ because it is such versatile tool, but it definitely is not 
the right tool for every task. I have written quite some web 
applications in my time and used technologies such as Pearl, PHP and 
Python. They are highly light weight languages that mend themselves to 
the needs of quickly putting things together. Sure they are slow like 
hell, but that is not an issue since the program is waiting on the 
database most of the time. 

For simple height level scripting task I will always use a lightweight 
scripting language and for serious heavy duty tasks I will almost always 
use C++. But the important part is to look at the available technologies 
and ask yourself which will get the task done in an efficient and proper 
way. 

Technologies that don't really know what they want, such as .Net or 
EJB just do not have a place in my tool belt. (And don't get me 
started about Java...) 

<h2>Do You Even Know What You Are Talking About?!</h2> 

To clarify my position let me explain a bit of background on myself. I 
have developed on both sides of the spectrum and in many places in 
between. I started programming web applications, first with Pearl, then 
PHP. I then moved over to program tools for CFD applications in C++, 
including a fully fledged graphical editor using OpenGL. I then moved on 
to program and maintain a compiler and interpreter for an interpreted 
language for industry automation using C++. Along all this delved into 
technology for games as a hobby which where mostly C++ and kept 
developing websites for personal use, including Python with Django and 
the Google Apps Engine. And Finally I am working in a team developing an 
editor for panels and control room displays for industry and plant 
automation which is written in C#. As it happens, this editor is also 
the largest C# application ever developed (at least so I am told). It 
takes a certain size of application to see where C# is failing. 

