---
layout: post
title: "Green - Day 3"
tags:
    - green
    - ogre
    - ois
---

Well, I must confess, this is actually the post for two "half" days. With 
sickness, social obligations and the release of Hart of the Swarm and BioShock
Infinite it is really hard to get work done. But that is the bane of the hobby 
developers.

First I got the Scene / Entity concept implemented. I implemented a TestScene object,
that should contain a smallish physic test scene. To exit the engine in full screen
mode, I implemented the logic in the TestScene. But I don't know if it even
belongs there.

There are some issues that are nagging me about this design. How do you implement
logic that is not bound to one scene and transport (store) the data from one to 
the other? I think a "cloud" of entities in the engine may make sense, the scene
is just a special entity. This allows for special entities to live longer then 
the scene. 

<!--more-->

I think Unreal uses that design. In that case they have a Game entity,
that refers to a special entities, such as the scene type, the pawn (player avatar)
and the player controller. This design is geared towards FPS, but not a bad idea 
in principle.

The other issue I have with my current design is that the InputSystem / GraphicSystem
abstractions are, in my opinion, premature abstractions. Wrapping OGRE and OIS
in a layer of abstraction classes, reduces coupling but significantly increases
workload. I tried to throw the system concept fully overboard and take 
the basic design from the ExampleApplication. But that was a major mess. I
can't see me adding Bullet, an audio library and a networking package and 
retain my sanity with this design.

So, I have decided to keep the basic System idea, but have very concrete systems, 
such as OgreSystem and OisSystem and let the implementation details shine
through. This isolates code but keeps the systems exposed and does not delve in 
premature abstraction. Finally I can add an extra level of abstraction if it 
makes more sense, then the holy grail of dependency inversion.

For example, the GraphicSystem would have a MeshVisual that represents a 
3D mesh in the scene. The OGRE counterpart are the two classes
Node and Entity. Common code to put a mesh into the scene, that would have been
embedded in MeshVisaul can still be abstracted in the OgreSystem, such as 
in a method create_mesh_view. The main difference is that it returns a Node class.

