---
layout: post
title: "3 Keys for Indi Game Projects"
tags:
    - meta
    - management
---

[3 Overlooked Keys to Making Outstanding Games][1] (Game Career Guide)

This is a very interesting article, even though it is stating the obvious. The
basic idea in the article is that you need 3 "keys" that are often overlooked by
independent game designers. 

These keys are:

<ul>
  <li>Set Clear Goals for Your Game</li>
  <li>Map Out What You Know and Don't Know</li>
  <li>Make a Simple Schedule</li>
</ul>

Now let's take some time and look at my so far failed game projects. So far I
have had the ideas and started development on (at least designing) the games of
Lunar Exodus (RTS), Captain Pink Beard (Point and Click Adventure), Glow Cubes
(Puzzle "Shooter") and My Little Garden (Casual Simulation).

<!--more-->

<h2>Set Clear Goals for Your Game</h2>

Basically I have the simple goal for my games, they should be fun. And by fun I
mean a game that I would play. The only exception was My Little Garden, this was
focused to be fun for my daughter.

A optional goal was to sell the games. This is based on the assumption, if the
game is fun, you can sell it. Making a game sellable means also extending the
scope of the project; but if you got a fully fledged game doing that is not so
hard.

<h2>Map Out What You Know and Don't Know</h2>

After some years of experience in software development I have developed a more
lax approach to design. Somewhat inspired by the notion of [agile modeling][2]; 
I basically shoot from
the hip with a basic idea. As the project progresses bits and pieces are
designed on the go. No code is written without a design, but that design is only
evaluated minutes, hours and sometimes days before the actual implementation. In
some cases the design is evaluated and altered as new and unknown requirements
come up.

I use the same approach to game design. It feels like it worked, but that is the
problem; I can't prove it. In many instances, especially Lunar Exodus and
Captain Pink Beard, I did not even come to the point where the basic "from the
hip" idea was altered. I never even reached a playable state because of
technical challenges. 

During the development of Lunar Exodus I wrote the design document along side
programming the engine. It feels like the projects that had the largest design
documents are those that failed more spectacularly. Alternately you could state
that these projects where those with the largest scope.

<h2>Make a Simple Schedule</h2>

This is one of my favorite points in project management. In many projects, not
only games, I see people going around and telling you the properly plan your
project ahead. They especially thing on project plans and gantt charts. If a
project fails they tell you things like <i>"If only you would have planed
properly then your would have succeeded."</i> ignoring the fact that the reason
why the project was in trouble was not seen during the planing phase.

My problem with classical project management (i.e. Waterfall) is that it fixes
the scope at the beginning, then evaluates what needs to be done and plans for
it. If you halt the project mid term or you miss estimate the effort and run out
of time (and budget) you basically have nothing. A few disconnected pieces of
work but not a working project. Lunar Exodus was relatively well planed and I
think it killed first the morale and then the project.

Lately I have tried to take a more feature centric approach. A mix between XP's
user stories and Scrum's backlog. Although I am not running in iterations (maybe
one of my current problems), I have tried to always have a running version from
the get go. If you look at my [Glow Cubes (The Demo)][3] project, I
wrote a basic NSIS installer script that builds a final installer on day one.

<h2>Scope and Motivation</h2>

It is hard to tell what killed my game projects. But I think the biggest point
is that I fixed a way to large scope for one hobby developer and keeping me
motivated for the period required to finish the project.

[1]: http://gamecareerguide.com/features/845/features/845/3_overlooked_keys_to_making_.php
[2]: http://www.agilemodeling.com
[3]: /2010/04/16/go-go-glow-cubes.html
