---
layout: post
title: "Section 8"
tags:
    - review
    - games
---

... almost perfect.

[Section 8: Prejudice][1] is a real breath of fresh air in the shooter scene.
The game is a SciFi shooter where you are playing as a space marine in the 
distant future. The game is intended as a multiplayer game but has a 6 hour
"tutorial" campaign. The campaign is fun an the narrative makes sense but still
keeps to the core of the multiplayer gameplay.

<img src="/media/prejudice_1.jpg" width="640" />

<!--more-->

You are playing as a space marine, with a cool combat armor and futuristic but
still believable weapons and tech. What really made my day was, that this is 
the first game that has believable health regeneration. It's not your health,
it's your personal shield and armor damage. And if the shield energy is depleted
you need to wait a short while until it rebuilds. You really know you are in 
trouble when a female voice whispers in your ear "Shield Down". Your armor can 
also get damaged, even though it repairs it's self, that is quite slow and you 
might want to either repair it yourself (you have a tool equipped) or get 
repaired by your fellow team mate.

What also really is a nice feature is the fact that there are no classes. You 
have 6 different preconfigured loadouts that you can change to your harts 
desire. That means you can have an "engineer" with a sniper rifle if you like.

<img src="/media/prejudice_2.jpg" width="640" />

The environments are actually quite nice to look at and really make a difference
from the gritty dirt heaps you seem to play in recently. Even though it is set 
in a SciFi environment, it is the type that feels believable. The look and feel
of the technology and locales really feels like it belongs there, without 
loosing the awe and excitement of the exotic setting.

As I said in the very first sentence: "Almost perfect". The biggest flaw in the 
game is the set of the features those users that are incapable to use a mouse. 
Although you have a hi-tech armor suit, that actually has a neat sprint 
function, your normal movement is slow like hell. You can basically forget 
strafing, it really does not make a difference. They tried to add some dynamic, 
with the nifty jet pack (rather jump jet), but that adds little to the overall
feeling or immobility. If slow targets are hard to aim at you have a built
in auto aim. Although it has a cooldown, it really means that you can basically 
ditch the idea of dodging out of harms way. So unless you push a buddy into 
the targeting radical of the other player, your only option is to shoot first. 
Finally even when the cooldown of the auto aim is recharging you have the built
in aim assist feature; bring the center of the screen close any player and you
score a nice head shot.

<img src="/media/prejudice_3.jpg" width="640" />

The game really shows allot of potential and for an independent studio is a real
achievement in a sea of meritocracy.

<div class="yt-embed" data-video="YDStDATP7M8" data-thumbnail="https://i.ytimg.com/vi/YDStDATP7M8/sddefault.jpg"></div>

The game is based on the Ureal 3 engine; maybe creating a mod that tweaks the
flaws out might be an idea...   

[1]: http://warisprejudice.com/
