---
layout: post
title: "Green - Day 4"
tags:
    - green
    - engineering   
---

I implemented my musing from [yesterday]. The only change is, that I kept the
names InputSystem and GraphicSystem, instead of OisSystem and OgreSystem 
respectively. The rationale behind this is that it makes more sense to use a
name that describes what they do and not what they are.

Interestingly, it suddenly dawned on my how the [Law of Demeter][lod] works in practice.

<!--more-->

For example let's take the two bits of code, that do the same thing:

Example 1:

    size_t window_id = graphic->get_window_id();
    
Example 2:

    size_t window_id;
    Ogre::RenderWindow* window = graphic->get_window();
    window->get_attribute("WINDOW", &window_id);
    
The first example follows the law of Demeter. This has as a result that the client
code is more compact and the interface of the GraphicSystem wider. But that
is only a collateral. The real use is that in the second example, OGRE is
directly involved. This means, should the GraphicSystem ever use something other
than OGRE, all clients must be altered.

But since I decided to keep it as concrete as sensibly possible I went for the
second. The nasty part of OGRE is you not only get a binding on code level, 
but also on the art level. The thing is that you need to transform all your meshes
to OGRE's mesh format and all materials to OGRE's material code. Going away
from OGRE would also mean that either the assets all need to be transformed
or code needs to be written to read OGRE's format. But for now I am not planing
on doing that.

[yesterday]: /2013/03/27/green-day3.html
[lod]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_Demeter
