---
layout: post
title: "MinGW-w64 for the Uninitiated"
tags:
    - mingw
    - programming
---

The recent version of [MinGW32] fully and totally broke on me this 
weekend. Actually it broke earlier, I just did not register it. But after 
SDL2 was unable to load OpenGL on code that worked before the upgrade,
the cat was out of the box. All the little issues I had with libraries acting
odd are related to something with MinGW's internals being broken; probably 
something in glibc. (Before someone disses me for this, yes I know the upgrade
to GCC 4.7.0 is ABI incompatible, I spent about two days recompiling ALL third
party libraries from source.) Finally the MinGW package definition for the 
installer was updated, but in a broken unusable state, which even ensured that
MinGW would not install. 

So after some detours I ended up using the [MinGW-w64] fork. If you listen to the
community, the w64 version is better and more up to date, so that is a plus. 
The only thing that put me off was the ease of use of getting MinGW32 up and
running with the automated installer. 

As it turns out it is not that hard to get MinGW-w64 up and running. The only 
problem is it is not obvious. For that reason I will show you here and now how
to get your MinGW-w64 environment in about 5 minutes. (Shorter than it takes
you to read this post.)

<!--more-->

MinGW-w64
---------

The information on MinGW-w64's website is confusing, partially misleading
and for good parts useless. So visit it with caution. I only found out the 
best course of action after some trial and error.

For the most part we will use the work by the excellent people from [MinGW-builds]. 
They provide two ways of getting MinGW, either by installer of [7zip] package. 
Since any developer worth his salt should be able to extract a zip archive,
we will use that.

There are multiple build configurations you can choose from. 

* The first option is your host system. Unless you are cross compiling 
 (and we will not do that) your host is window. 
* Then you have the choice of testing and release. Unless you like to improve 
  GCC or the MinGW compilation you basically want the release version. 
* Then you can chose the version, and you basically always want the latest,
  in my case that is 4.8.1. 
* The next option is 32 vs 64 bit, that is the host configuration, not the 
  target configuration. You need to know what your machine is, but in most cases 
  that would be 64bit and that is my case.
* The next option is the thread library used and the options are win32 or posix 
  (pthreads). Without belessing the merits of pthreads, you basically always want
  to use the native threading library.
* After that you have to chose the exception model. Depending on the "bitness"
  (32 vs 64 bit) you have the options of dwarf, sjlj or SEH. Following the 
  documentation, you want the chose the model as SEH > sjlj > dwarf. The only
  thing to note is that you can not mix the models and expect exceptions to 
  seamlessly pass over DLL boundaries. So the choice may be different for your
  purposes. I will use SEH, which piggybacks on Window's structured exception
  handling feature. 
* Finally files! The last thing to choose is the revision and that is
  in almost all cases the latest. Here and now this is rev5.
  
Each of the above options is a folder in [MinGW-w64's download folder][mingwdl]. I ended
up using [x64-4.8.1-release-win32-seh-rev5.7z][dl]

After downloading the archive you need to unpack it. (You have [7zip], don't you?)
I unpacked it under C:\minw64, like the original MinGW. You can put it whereever 
you like, but historically the packages do not work well with paths with spaces
(e.g. "Program Files). This appears to have been resolved, since the installer
will put it by default under Program Files.

MSys
----

For me MinGW and MSys go hand in hand. The primary reason is that configure and 
make, as used by almost all open source projects simply do not work with cmd. 

The MinGW-w64 people do not maintain a MSys fork. The good news is that
the MinGW-build people maintain a bundle of the essential development tools, 
being MSys, 7za, wget, svn, git, mercurial and csv. Wow, what a value! 

You can find the bundle under [external-binary-packages] and here and now 
the latest version is [rev13]. 

I extracted the archive to c:\msys, but that is up to you. 

For MSys some minor adjustments must be made. The first is telling it where 
everything is by writing an fstab. Like the "real" fstab on a Linux machine, 
MSys' fstab tells what to "mount" where. My fstab (c:\msys\etc\fstab) looks 
like this:

    c:/mingw64 /mingw
    c:/Users   /home    

The minimum you need to do is tell it where mingw is. That will ensure that
the compiler is found. I also alias the Win7 user directories into /home. This
ensures that user settings are persisted over multiple installs of MSys or
other tools like Cygwin or msysGit.

The next thing to do is tell compiler that it should also look into 
MSys' folder for includes and libraries. From the viewpoint of GCC and friends
they are running on a Windows machine and folders like /usr/include simply don't
exist so they will not look there. But the behaviour can be regained by specifying
the folders in CFLAGS, CXXFLAGS and LDFLAGS. To do this extend the profile 
(c:\msys\etc\profile) with the following values:

    CFLAGS="-I/usr/include -I/usr/local/include -g -Wall"
    CXXFLAGS=$(CFLAGS)
    LDFLAGS="-L/usr/lib -L/usr/local/lib"
    
The folders will then be converted by bash to windows paths before handing it
off to the compiler.      
    
pkg-config
----------

This is optional, but if you need pkg-config here is how to get it for 
your MinGW-w64 installation. 

The original pkg-config has a very stupid dependency to glib. It is a stupid 
dependency, since glib also needs pkg-config to build. So if you neither have
glib or pkg-config built, you will not be able to build one or the other. 
(There are ways around this, but it remains a stupid idea.)

Since everybody except the Gnome developers (who invented pkg-config) thought
this was a bad idea a fork was created that resolved this dependency: [pkg-config-lite].

The only thing they do is take the original pkg-config and package the 4 function
from glib into the package. The result is you can build pkg-config without any
dependencies. 

The best way to get pkg-config-lite is to take the source package. In my 
cases that is [pkg-config-lite-0.28-1.tar.gz]. 

Building the package is quite standard:

    tar -xzvf pkg-config-lite-0.28-1.tar.gz
    cd pkg-config-lite-0.28-1
    ./configure
    make
    make install

The only thing you need to do is fix the PKG_CONFIG_PATH varaible for proper
use in MSys. This is done just like the CFLAGS in the profile:

    PKG_CONFIG_PATH="/usr/lib/pkconfig:/usr/local/lib/pkconfig"

Bison and Flex
--------------

Not many people need bison and flex, but I do. You may skip this if you do not
need flex and bison.

The bad news it that neither bison nor flex work out of the box. Although bison
will compile flawlessly, it will stumble when trying to find it's data files. 
Flex on the other hand will simply not build, by virtue that someone through it
a good idea to use fork to implement recursion over analysing lexical expressions.  

The good news, somebody else solved the problem for us. That is the [Win flex-bison]
project and you should get the lates version [win_flex_bison-2.5.zip].

Although not the cleanest option, what I did was simply extract the contents of
the archive to c:\msys\local\bin, including the data directory. (The data 
directory must be relative to the executables.) By renaming the binaries from 
win_bision.exe to bision.exe and win_flex.exe to flex.exe every script that
expects them, will see them. The only thing I additionally did was move the 
FlexLexer.h to c:\msys\local\include.
    
[MinGW32]: http://www.mingw.org/
[MinGW-w64]: http://mingw-w64.sourceforge.net/
[MinGW-builds]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingwbuilds/
[7zip]: http://www.7-zip.org/
[mingwdl]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingwbuilds/files/
[dl]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingwbuilds/files/host-windows/releases/4.8.1/64-bit/threads-win32/seh/x64-4.8.1-release-win32-seh-rev5.7z/download
[external-binary-packages]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingwbuilds/files/external-binary-packages/
[rev13]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingwbuilds/files/external-binary-packages/msys%2B7za%2Bwget%2Bsvn%2Bgit%2Bmercurial%2Bcvs-rev13.7z/download
[pkg-config-lite]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/pkgconfiglite/
[pkg-config-lite-0.28-1.tar.gz]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/pkgconfiglite/files/0.28-1/pkg-config-lite-0.28-1.tar.gz/download
[Win flex-bison]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/winflexbison/
[win_flex_bison-2.5.zip]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/winflexbison/files/win_flex_bison-2.5.zip/download