---
layout: post
title:  "Swipes - the Procrastinator's To Do List"
tags:
    - productivity
    - review
---

<div class="yt-embed" data-video="tweOSZdPmO0" data-thumbnail="https://i.ytimg.com/vi/tweOSZdPmO0/sddefault.jpg"></div>

For a while now I have been using [Swipes][1]. On the surface it looks like a run of
the mill to do list, but there is a small twist to it. The way you "schedule" 
tasks is ingenious.

I don't need a to do list for the important things. Each morning
I sit down and think about the three most important things I need to to today
and I do them. Where things get lost along the way are all the small tasks. 
You know those tasks that are small, not really important, but hurt when not 
done. Tasks like cancelling a subscription, checking why Amazon is complaining 
about your IAM policies, you know those many 5 minutes tasks. 

<!--more-->

*"If it takes 5 minutes, than do it now"*, is awfully bad advice. The problem
is that I currently have 15 tasks (not all are 5 min long) and doing all of them 
would probably take 2 hours. But I don't have 2 hours to spare and half of the 
tasks I can't do now anyway; I can't decalcify my espresso machine when I am not 
home.

And here is where swipes comes in. Like any task list, you simply record the 
task and next time you have time to spare you look at your to do list and do 
as much as you can. So far so boringly common, but here is the twist: by default 
you only see your currently active tasks. When going through your to do list, 
you decide to do this task this evening, that task tomorrow and the next task 
this week end. Once you scheduled the task you will not see it again until the 
given time.

The result is that you are not mentally burdened by all the undone tasks. You 
can focus on those tasks you want to do now and when you are done, the list
is empty. This is little, but the psychological effect of actually clearing the
list is astounding. 

*Now if swipes could also run on my oldish phone...*

[1]: http://swipesapp.com/
